# Identifiers

Identifiers, or IDs for short, are unique values that are used to identify a
specific resource in the real world and/or in an IT system.

This document discusses different types of identifiers. What business
identifiers are used on the resources are detailed in the
[documentation for the specific resources](../resources/index.md).

## Surrogate vs natural keys

A common way to classify different identifiers (at least in database design) is to
call them "natural" and "surrogate" keys.

A natural key is a key that is derived from the data itself. For example, a
person's social security number is a natural key for a person. A surrogate key
is a key that is generated by the system, and has no meaning outside of the
system. For example, a UUID or incremental identifiers is a surrogate key.

## Multiple identifiers

It is common for a resource to have multiple identifiers. A metering point might
have a metering point ID (GSRN), an internal incremental integer ID in the system
and an external-facing UUID. Sometimes it is also useful to store an external
systems reference to the same logical/business object.

## Multiple types of identifiers

It is sometimes useful to allow multiple types of identifiers for a resource. A
relevant example could be to allow the use of both GLN and EIC-X for parties. In
such scenarios, it might be wise to include a type field as part of the
identifier.

Example:

```json
{
  "business_id_type": "GLN",
  "business_id": "0847976000005"
}
```

## Resource identifiers - Incremental integers

All resources are primarily identified by an incremental integer in the API and
system. See the [API documentation](api-design.md#identifiers) for more information.

## Identifier types

There are lots of different types of identifiers. This section outlines relevant
ones for a Norwegian Flexibility Information System.

### GS1 Standards - GLN, GSRN et.al

[GS1](https://gs1.no/standarder-for-identifikasjon/) has quite a few different
identifiers. They are typically prefixed with a country and business
identifiers. Notable mentions are:

* Global Location Number (GLN) - 13 digits - used for identifying parties.
  Example: `0847976000005`
* Global Service Relation Number (GSRN) - 18 digits - used for identifying
  metering point. Example: `012345678901234560`
* GIAI (Global Individual Asset Identifier) - 30 alphanumeric characters - used
  for identifying meters.

Core benefits of using GLN and GSRN is that they are globally unique (ensured by
GS1) and human-friendly since they include a check digit (no typos!).

### Energy Identification Codes (EIC)

[EIC](https://www.entsoe.eu/data/energy-identification-codes-eic/#allocated-eic-codes)
is maintained by ENTSO-E and can be used to
identify market participants, areas, measuring points, resource objects,
tie-lines, location and substations.

It's 16 alphanumeric characters including issuing office, type and check digit.
Used for grids (MGA, MBA) in imbalance settlement.

Example: `10X1001A1001A38Y`

### Universally Unique Identifier (UUID)

[UUID](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9562) provides globally unique
identifiers and has its own URN namespace `urn:uuid`. There are
[many different versions](https://ntietz.com/blog/til-uses-for-the-different-uuid-versions/).
Both v4 and v7 could be good choices for us.

Example: `55840dbe-0131-40ae-9077-e78b2a8c1455`

Common Information Model (CIM) promotes the use of UUIDs as identifiers for the
[IdentifiedObject Master resource identifier (mRID)](https://ontology.tno.nl/IEC_CIM/cim_IdentifiedObject.mRID.html).

### Universally Unique Lexicographically Sortable Identifier (ULID)

[ULID](https://github.com/ulid/spec) are kind of like UUIDs but they are
shorter, case-insensitive, URL safe and sortable.

Example: `01ARZ3NDEKTSV4RRFFQ69G5FAV`

### Incremental integers

A very common way to generate identifiers in a system is go pick the next number
from a sequence.

This is simple but only unique in the system that generates the identifier
unless paired with a guaranteed unique prefix.

Example: `1212`.
